Title 29: Labor

PART 541—DEFINING AND DELIMITING THE EXEMPTIONS FOR EXECUTIVE, ADMINISTRATIVE,
PROFESSIONAL, COMPUTER AND OUTSIDE SALES EMPLOYEES
Contents
Subpart A—General Regulations
§541.0 Introductory statement.
§541.1 Terms used in regulations.
§541.2 Job titles insufficient.
§541.3 Scope of the section 13(a)(1) exemptions.
§541.4 Other laws and collective bargaining agreements.
Subpart B—Executive Employees
§541.100 General rule for executive employees.
§541.101 Business owner.
§541.102 Management.
§541.103 Department or subdivision.
§541.104 Two or more other employees.
§541.105 Particular weight.
§541.106 Concurrent duties.
Subpart C—Administrative Employees
§541.200 General rule for administrative employees.
§541.201 Directly related to management or general business operations.
§541.202 Discretion and independent judgment.
§541.203 Administrative exemption examples.
§541.204 Educational establishments.
Subpart D—Professional Employees
§541.300 General rule for professional employees.
§541.301 Learned professionals.
§541.302 Creative professionals.
§541.303 Teachers.
§541.304 Practice of law or medicine.
Subpart E—Computer Employees
§541.400 General rule for computer employees.
§541.401 Computer manufacture and repair.
§541.402 Executive and administrative computer employees.
Subpart F—Outside Sales Employees
§541.500 General rule for outside sales employees.
§541.501 Making sales or obtaining orders.
§541.502 Away from employer's place of business.
§541.503 Promotion work.
§541.504 Drivers who sell.
Subpart G—Salary Requirements
§541.600 Amount of salary required.
§541.601 Highly compensated employees.
§541.602 Salary basis.
§541.603 Effect of improper deductions from salary.
§541.604 Minimum guarantee plus extras.
§541.605 Fee basis.
§541.606 Board, lodging or other facilities.
Subpart H—Definitions and Miscellaneous Provisions

§541.700
§541.701
§541.702
§541.703
§541.704
§541.705
§541.706
§541.707
§541.708
§541.709
§541.710

Primary duty.
Customarily and regularly.
Exempt and nonexempt work.
Directly and closely related.
Use of manuals.
Trainees.
Emergencies.
Occasional tasks.
Combination exemptions.
Motion picture producing industry.
Employees of public agencies.

AUTHORITY: 29 U.S.C. 213; Public Law 101-583, 104 Stat. 2871; Reorganization Plan No. 6 of 1950 (3 CFR
1945-53 Comp. p. 1004); Secretary's Order No. 4-2001 (66 FR 29656).
SOURCE: 69 FR 22260, Apr. 23, 2004, unless otherwise noted.

Subpart A—General Regulations
§541.0 Introductory statement.
(a) Section 13(a)(1) of the Fair Labor Standards Act, as amended, provides an exemption from the
Act's minimum wage and overtime requirements for any employee employed in a bona fide executive,
administrative, or professional capacity (including any employee employed in the capacity of academic
administrative personnel or teacher in elementary or secondary schools), or in the capacity of an outside
sales employee, as such terms are defined and delimited from time to time by regulations of the
Secretary, subject to the provisions of the Administrative Procedure Act. Section 13(a)(17) of the Act
provides an exemption from the minimum wage and overtime requirements for computer systems
analysts, computer programmers, software engineers, and other similarly skilled computer employees.
(b) The requirements for these exemptions are contained in this part as follows: executive
employees, subpart B; administrative employees, subpart C; professional employees, subpart D;
computer employees, subpart E; outside sales employees, subpart F. Subpart G contains regulations
regarding salary requirements applicable to most of the exemptions, including salary levels and the salary
basis test. Subpart G also contains a provision for exempting certain highly compensated employees.
Subpart H contains definitions and other miscellaneous provisions applicable to all or several of the
exemptions.
(c) Effective July 1, 1972, the Fair Labor Standards Act was amended to include within the
protection of the equal pay provisions those employees exempt from the minimum wage and overtime
pay provisions as bona fide executive, administrative, and professional employees (including any
employee employed in the capacity of academic administrative personnel or teacher in elementary or
secondary schools), or in the capacity of an outside sales employee under section 13(a)(1) of the Act.
The equal pay provisions in section 6(d) of the Fair Labor Standards Act are administered and enforced
by the United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
§541.1 Terms used in regulations.
Act means the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, as amended.
Administrator means the Administrator of the Wage and Hour Division, United States Department of
Labor. The Secretary of Labor has delegated to the Administrator the functions vested in the Secretary
under sections 13(a)(1) and 13(a)(17) of the Fair Labor Standards Act.
§541.2 Job titles insufficient.

A job title alone is insufficient to establish the exempt status of an employee. The exempt or
nonexempt status of any particular employee must be determined on the basis of whether the employee's
salary and duties meet the requirements of the regulations in this part.
§541.3 Scope of the section 13(a)(1) exemptions.
(a) The section 13(a)(1) exemptions and the regulations in this part do not apply to manual laborers
or other “blue collar” workers who perform work involving repetitive operations with their hands, physical
skill and energy. Such nonexempt “blue collar” employees gain the skills and knowledge required for
performance of their routine manual and physical work through apprenticeships and on-the-job training,
not through the prolonged course of specialized intellectual instruction required for exempt learned
professional employees such as medical doctors, architects and archeologists. Thus, for example, nonmanagement production-line employees and non-management employees in maintenance, construction
and similar occupations such as carpenters, electricians, mechanics, plumbers, iron workers, craftsmen,
operating engineers, longshoremen, construction workers and laborers are entitled to minimum wage and
overtime premium pay under the Fair Labor Standards Act, and are not exempt under the regulations in
this part no matter how highly paid they might be.
(b)(1) The section 13(a)(1) exemptions and the regulations in this part also do not apply to police
officers, detectives, deputy sheriffs, state troopers, highway patrol officers, investigators, inspectors,
correctional officers, parole or probation officers, park rangers, fire fighters, paramedics, emergency
medical technicians, ambulance personnel, rescue workers, hazardous materials workers and similar
employees, regardless of rank or pay level, who perform work such as preventing, controlling or
extinguishing fires of any type; rescuing fire, crime or accident victims; preventing or detecting crimes;
conducting investigations or inspections for violations of law; performing surveillance; pursuing,
restraining and apprehending suspects; detaining or supervising suspected and convicted criminals,
including those on probation or parole; interviewing witnesses; interrogating and fingerprinting suspects;
preparing investigative reports; or other similar work.
(2) Such employees do not qualify as exempt executive employees because their primary duty is not
management of the enterprise in which the employee is employed or a customarily recognized
department or subdivision thereof as required under §541.100. Thus, for example, a police officer or fire
fighter whose primary duty is to investigate crimes or fight fires is not exempt under section 13(a)(1) of the
Act merely because the police officer or fire fighter also directs the work of other employees in the
conduct of an investigation or fighting a fire.
(3) Such employees do not qualify as exempt administrative employees because their primary duty
is not the performance of work directly related to the management or general business operations of the
employer or the employer's customers as required under §541.200.
(4) Such employees do not qualify as exempt professionals because their primary duty is not the
performance of work requiring knowledge of an advanced type in a field of science or learning customarily
acquired by a prolonged course of specialized intellectual instruction or the performance of work requiring
invention, imagination, originality or talent in a recognized field of artistic or creative endeavor as required
under §541.300. Although some police officers, fire fighters, paramedics, emergency medical technicians
and similar employees have college degrees, a specialized academic degree is not a standard
prerequisite for employment in such occupations.
§541.4 Other laws and collective bargaining agreements.
The Fair Labor Standards Act provides minimum standards that may be exceeded, but cannot be
waived or reduced. Employers must comply, for example, with any Federal, State or municipal laws,
regulations or ordinances establishing a higher minimum wage or lower maximum workweek than those
established under the Act. Similarly, employers, on their own initiative or under a collective bargaining

agreement with a labor union, are not precluded by the Act from providing a wage higher than the
statutory minimum, a shorter workweek than the statutory maximum, or a higher overtime premium
(double time, for example) than provided by the Act. While collective bargaining agreements cannot waive
or reduce the Act's protections, nothing in the Act or the regulations in this part relieves employers from
their contractual obligations under collective bargaining agreements.

Subpart B—Executive Employees
§541.100 General rule for executive employees.
(a) The term “employee employed in a bona fide executive capacity” in section 13(a)(1) of the Act
shall mean any employee:
(1) Compensated on a salary basis at a rate of not less than $455 per week (or $380 per week, if
employed in American Samoa by employers other than the Federal Government), exclusive of board,
lodging or other facilities;
(2) Whose primary duty is management of the enterprise in which the employee is employed or of a
customarily recognized department or subdivision thereof;
(3) Who customarily and regularly directs the work of two or more other employees; and
(4) Who has the authority to hire or fire other employees or whose suggestions and
recommendations as to the hiring, firing, advancement, promotion or any other change of status of other
employees are given particular weight.
(b) The phrase “salary basis” is defined at §541.602; “board, lodging or other facilities” is defined at
§541.606; “primary duty” is defined at §541.700; and “customarily and regularly” is defined at §541.701.
§541.101 Business owner.
The term “employee employed in a bona fide executive capacity” in section 13(a)(1) of the Act also
includes any employee who owns at least a bona fide 20-percent equity interest in the enterprise in which
the employee is employed, regardless of whether the business is a corporate or other type of
organization, and who is actively engaged in its management. The term “management” is defined in
§541.102. The requirements of Subpart G (salary requirements) of this part do not apply to the business
owners described in this section.
§541.102 Management.
Generally, “management” includes, but is not limited to, activities such as interviewing, selecting,
and training of employees; setting and adjusting their rates of pay and hours of work; directing the work of
employees; maintaining production or sales records for use in supervision or control; appraising
employees' productivity and efficiency for the purpose of recommending promotions or other changes in
status; handling employee complaints and grievances; disciplining employees; planning the work;
determining the techniques to be used; apportioning the work among the employees; determining the
type of materials, supplies, machinery, equipment or tools to be used or merchandise to be bought,
stocked and sold; controlling the flow and distribution of materials or merchandise and supplies; providing
for the safety and security of the employees or the property; planning and controlling the budget; and
monitoring or implementing legal compliance measures.
§541.103 Department or subdivision.

(a) The phrase “a customarily recognized department or subdivision” is intended to distinguish
between a mere collection of employees assigned from time to time to a specific job or series of jobs and
a unit with permanent status and function. A customarily recognized department or subdivision must have
a permanent status and a continuing function. For example, a large employer's human resources
department might have subdivisions for labor relations, pensions and other benefits, equal employment
opportunity, and personnel management, each of which has a permanent status and function.
(b) When an enterprise has more than one establishment, the employee in charge of each
establishment may be considered in charge of a recognized subdivision of the enterprise.
(c) A recognized department or subdivision need not be physically within the employer's
establishment and may move from place to place. The mere fact that the employee works in more than
one location does not invalidate the exemption if other factors show that the employee is actually in
charge of a recognized unit with a continuing function in the organization.
(d) Continuity of the same subordinate personnel is not essential to the existence of a recognized
unit with a continuing function. An otherwise exempt employee will not lose the exemption merely
because the employee draws and supervises workers from a pool or supervises a team of workers drawn
from other recognized units, if other factors are present that indicate that the employee is in charge of a
recognized unit with a continuing function.
§541.104 Two or more other employees.
(a) To qualify as an exempt executive under §541.100, the employee must customarily and regularly
direct the work of two or more other employees. The phrase “two or more other employees” means two
full-time employees or their equivalent. One full-time and two half-time employees, for example, are
equivalent to two full-time employees. Four half-time employees are also equivalent.
(b) The supervision can be distributed among two, three or more employees, but each such
employee must customarily and regularly direct the work of two or more other full-time employees or the
equivalent. Thus, for example, a department with five full-time nonexempt workers may have up to two
exempt supervisors if each such supervisor customarily and regularly directs the work of two of those
workers.
(c) An employee who merely assists the manager of a particular department and supervises two or
more employees only in the actual manager's absence does not meet this requirement.
(d) Hours worked by an employee cannot be credited more than once for different executives. Thus,
a shared responsibility for the supervision of the same two employees in the same department does not
satisfy this requirement. However, a full-time employee who works four hours for one supervisor and four
hours for a different supervisor, for example, can be credited as a half-time employee for both
supervisors.
§541.105 Particular weight.
To determine whether an employee's suggestions and recommendations are given “particular
weight,” factors to be considered include, but are not limited to, whether it is part of the employee's job
duties to make such suggestions and recommendations; the frequency with which such suggestions and
recommendations are made or requested; and the frequency with which the employee's suggestions and
recommendations are relied upon. Generally, an executive's suggestions and recommendations must
pertain to employees whom the executive customarily and regularly directs. It does not include an
occasional suggestion with regard to the change in status of a co-worker. An employee's suggestions and
recommendations may still be deemed to have “particular weight” even if a higher level manager's

recommendation has more importance and even if the employee does not have authority to make the
ultimate decision as to the employee's change in status.
§541.106 Concurrent duties.
(a) Concurrent performance of exempt and nonexempt work does not disqualify an employee from
the executive exemption if the requirements of §541.100 are otherwise met. Whether an employee meets
the requirements of §541.100 when the employee performs concurrent duties is determined on a caseby-case basis and based on the factors set forth in §541.700. Generally, exempt executives make the
decision regarding when to perform nonexempt duties and remain responsible for the success or failure
of business operations under their management while performing the nonexempt work. In contrast, the
nonexempt employee generally is directed by a supervisor to perform the exempt work or performs the
exempt work for defined time periods. An employee whose primary duty is ordinary production work or
routine, recurrent or repetitive tasks cannot qualify for exemption as an executive.
(b) For example, an assistant manager in a retail establishment may perform work such as serving
customers, cooking food, stocking shelves and cleaning the establishment, but performance of such
nonexempt work does not preclude the exemption if the assistant manager's primary duty is
management. An assistant manager can supervise employees and serve customers at the same time
without losing the exemption. An exempt employee can also simultaneously direct the work of other
employees and stock shelves.
(c) In contrast, a relief supervisor or working supervisor whose primary duty is performing
nonexempt work on the production line in a manufacturing plant does not become exempt merely
because the nonexempt production line employee occasionally has some responsibility for directing the
work of other nonexempt production line employees when, for example, the exempt supervisor is
unavailable. Similarly, an employee whose primary duty is to work as an electrician is not an exempt
executive even if the employee also directs the work of other employees on the job site, orders parts and
materials for the job, and handles requests from the prime contractor.

Subpart C—Administrative Employees
§541.200 General rule for administrative employees.
(a) The term “employee employed in a bona fide administrative capacity” in section 13(a)(1) of the
Act shall mean any employee:
(1) Compensated on a salary or fee basis at a rate of not less than $455 per week (or $380 per
week, if employed in American Samoa by employers other than the Federal Government), exclusive of
board, lodging or other facilities;
(2) Whose primary duty is the performance of office or non-manual work directly related to the
management or general business operations of the employer or the employer's customers; and
(3) Whose primary duty includes the exercise of discretion and independent judgment with respect
to matters of significance.
(b) The term “salary basis” is defined at §541.602; “fee basis” is defined at §541.605; “board,
lodging or other facilities” is defined at §541.606; and “primary duty” is defined at §541.700.
§541.201 Directly related to management or general business operations.

(a) To qualify for the administrative exemption, an employee's primary duty must be the
performance of work directly related to the management or general business operations of the employer
or the employer's customers. The phrase “directly related to the management or general business
operations” refers to the type of work performed by the employee. To meet this requirement, an employee
must perform work directly related to assisting with the running or servicing of the business, as
distinguished, for example, from working on a manufacturing production line or selling a product in a retail
or service establishment.
(b) Work directly related to management or general business operations includes, but is not limited
to, work in functional areas such as tax; finance; accounting; budgeting; auditing; insurance; quality
control; purchasing; procurement; advertising; marketing; research; safety and health; personnel
management; human resources; employee benefits; labor relations; public relations, government
relations; computer network, internet and database administration; legal and regulatory compliance; and
similar activities. Some of these activities may be performed by employees who also would qualify for
another exemption.
(c) An employee may qualify for the administrative exemption if the employee's primary duty is the
performance of work directly related to the management or general business operations of the employer's
customers. Thus, for example, employees acting as advisers or consultants to their employer's clients or
customers (as tax experts or financial consultants, for example) may be exempt.
§541.202 Discretion and independent judgment.
(a) To qualify for the administrative exemption, an employee's primary duty must include the
exercise of discretion and independent judgment with respect to matters of significance. In general, the
exercise of discretion and independent judgment involves the comparison and the evaluation of possible
courses of conduct, and acting or making a decision after the various possibilities have been considered.
The term “matters of significance” refers to the level of importance or consequence of the work
performed.
(b) The phrase “discretion and independent judgment” must be applied in the light of all the facts
involved in the particular employment situation in which the question arises. Factors to consider when
determining whether an employee exercises discretion and independent judgment with respect to matters
of significance include, but are not limited to: whether the employee has authority to formulate, affect,
interpret, or implement management policies or operating practices; whether the employee carries out
major assignments in conducting the operations of the business; whether the employee performs work
that affects business operations to a substantial degree, even if the employee's assignments are related
to operation of a particular segment of the business; whether the employee has authority to commit the
employer in matters that have significant financial impact; whether the employee has authority to waive or
deviate from established policies and procedures without prior approval; whether the employee has
authority to negotiate and bind the company on significant matters; whether the employee provides
consultation or expert advice to management; whether the employee is involved in planning long- or
short-term business objectives; whether the employee investigates and resolves matters of significance
on behalf of management; and whether the employee represents the company in handling complaints,
arbitrating disputes or resolving grievances.
(c) The exercise of discretion and independent judgment implies that the employee has authority to
make an independent choice, free from immediate direction or supervision. However, employees can
exercise discretion and independent judgment even if their decisions or recommendations are reviewed
at a higher level. Thus, the term “discretion and independent judgment” does not require that the
decisions made by an employee have a finality that goes with unlimited authority and a complete absence
of review. The decisions made as a result of the exercise of discretion and independent judgment may
consist of recommendations for action rather than the actual taking of action. The fact that an employee's
decision may be subject to review and that upon occasion the decisions are revised or reversed after
review does not mean that the employee is not exercising discretion and independent judgment. For

example, the policies formulated by the credit manager of a large corporation may be subject to review by
higher company officials who may approve or disapprove these policies. The management consultant
who has made a study of the operations of a business and who has drawn a proposed change in
organization may have the plan reviewed or revised by superiors before it is submitted to the client.
(d) An employer's volume of business may make it necessary to employ a number of employees to
perform the same or similar work. The fact that many employees perform identical work or work of the
same relative importance does not mean that the work of each such employee does not involve the
exercise of discretion and independent judgment with respect to matters of significance.
(e) The exercise of discretion and independent judgment must be more than the use of skill in
applying well-established techniques, procedures or specific standards described in manuals or other
sources. See also §541.704 regarding use of manuals. The exercise of discretion and independent
judgment also does not include clerical or secretarial work, recording or tabulating data, or performing
other mechanical, repetitive, recurrent or routine work. An employee who simply tabulates data is not
exempt, even if labeled as a “statistician.”
(f) An employee does not exercise discretion and independent judgment with respect to matters of
significance merely because the employer will experience financial losses if the employee fails to perform
the job properly. For example, a messenger who is entrusted with carrying large sums of money does not
exercise discretion and independent judgment with respect to matters of significance even though serious
consequences may flow from the employee's neglect. Similarly, an employee who operates very
expensive equipment does not exercise discretion and independent judgment with respect to matters of
significance merely because improper performance of the employee's duties may cause serious financial
loss to the employer.
§541.203 Administrative exemption examples.
(a) Insurance claims adjusters generally meet the duties requirements for the administrative
exemption, whether they work for an insurance company or other type of company, if their duties include
activities such as interviewing insureds, witnesses and physicians; inspecting property damage; reviewing
factual information to prepare damage estimates; evaluating and making recommendations regarding
coverage of claims; determining liability and total value of a claim; negotiating settlements; and making
recommendations regarding litigation.
(b) Employees in the financial services industry generally meet the duties requirements for the
administrative exemption if their duties include work such as collecting and analyzing information
regarding the customer's income, assets, investments or debts; determining which financial products best
meet the customer's needs and financial circumstances; advising the customer regarding the advantages
and disadvantages of different financial products; and marketing, servicing or promoting the employer's
financial products. However, an employee whose primary duty is selling financial products does not
qualify for the administrative exemption.
(c) An employee who leads a team of other employees assigned to complete major projects for the
employer (such as purchasing, selling or closing all or part of the business, negotiating a real estate
transaction or a collective bargaining agreement, or designing and implementing productivity
improvements) generally meets the duties requirements for the administrative exemption, even if the
employee does not have direct supervisory responsibility over the other employees on the team.
(d) An executive assistant or administrative assistant to a business owner or senior executive of a
large business generally meets the duties requirements for the administrative exemption if such
employee, without specific instructions or prescribed procedures, has been delegated authority regarding
matters of significance.

(e) Human resources managers who formulate, interpret or implement employment policies and
management consultants who study the operations of a business and propose changes in organization
generally meet the duties requirements for the administrative exemption. However, personnel clerks who
“screen” applicants to obtain data regarding their minimum qualifications and fitness for employment
generally do not meet the duties requirements for the administrative exemption. Such personnel clerks
typically will reject all applicants who do not meet minimum standards for the particular job or for
employment by the company. The minimum standards are usually set by the exempt human resources
manager or other company officials, and the decision to hire from the group of qualified applicants who do
meet the minimum standards is similarly made by the exempt human resources manager or other
company officials. Thus, when the interviewing and screening functions are performed by the human
resources manager or personnel manager who makes the hiring decision or makes recommendations for
hiring from the pool of qualified applicants, such duties constitute exempt work, even though routine,
because this work is directly and closely related to the employee's exempt functions.
(f) Purchasing agents with authority to bind the company on significant purchases generally meet
the duties requirements for the administrative exemption even if they must consult with top management
officials when making a purchase commitment for raw materials in excess of the contemplated plant
needs.
(g) Ordinary inspection work generally does not meet the duties requirements for the administrative
exemption. Inspectors normally perform specialized work along standardized lines involving wellestablished techniques and procedures which may have been catalogued and described in manuals or
other sources. Such inspectors rely on techniques and skills acquired by special training or experience.
They have some leeway in the performance of their work but only within closely prescribed limits.
(h) Employees usually called examiners or graders, such as employees that grade lumber, generally
do not meet the duties requirements for the administrative exemption. Such employees usually perform
work involving the comparison of products with established standards which are frequently catalogued.
Often, after continued reference to the written standards, or through experience, the employee acquires
sufficient knowledge so that reference to written standards is unnecessary. The substitution of the
employee's memory for a manual of standards does not convert the character of the work performed to
exempt work requiring the exercise of discretion and independent judgment.
(i) Comparison shopping performed by an employee of a retail store who merely reports to the buyer
the prices at a competitor's store does not qualify for the administrative exemption. However, the buyer
who evaluates such reports on competitor prices to set the employer's prices generally meets the duties
requirements for the administrative exemption.
(j) Public sector inspectors or investigators of various types, such as fire prevention or safety,
building or construction, health or sanitation, environmental or soils specialists and similar employees,
generally do not meet the duties requirements for the administrative exemption because their work
typically does not involve work directly related to the management or general business operations of the
employer. Such employees also do not qualify for the administrative exemption because their work
involves the use of skills and technical abilities in gathering factual information, applying known standards
or prescribed procedures, determining which procedure to follow, or determining whether prescribed
standards or criteria are met.
§541.204 Educational establishments.
(a) The term “employee employed in a bona fide administrative capacity” in section 13(a)(1) of the
Act also includes employees:
(1) Compensated for services on a salary or fee basis at a rate of not less than $455 per week (or
$380 per week, if employed in American Samoa by employers other than the Federal Government)

exclusive of board, lodging or other facilities, or on a salary basis which is at least equal to the entrance
salary for teachers in the educational establishment by which employed; and
(2) Whose primary duty is performing administrative functions directly related to academic
instruction or training in an educational establishment or department or subdivision thereof.
(b) The term “educational establishment” means an elementary or secondary school system, an
institution of higher education or other educational institution. Sections 3(v) and 3(w) of the Act define
elementary and secondary schools as those day or residential schools that provide elementary or
secondary education, as determined under State law. Under the laws of most States, such education
includes the curriculums in grades 1 through 12; under many it includes also the introductory programs in
kindergarten. Such education in some States may also include nursery school programs in elementary
education and junior college curriculums in secondary education. The term “other educational
establishment” includes special schools for mentally or physically disabled or gifted children, regardless of
any classification of such schools as elementary, secondary or higher. Factors relevant in determining
whether post-secondary career programs are educational institutions include whether the school is
licensed by a state agency responsible for the state's educational system or accredited by a nationally
recognized accrediting organization for career schools. Also, for purposes of the exemption, no distinction
is drawn between public and private schools, or between those operated for profit and those that are not
for profit.
(c) The phrase “performing administrative functions directly related to academic instruction or
training” means work related to the academic operations and functions in a school rather than to
administration along the lines of general business operations. Such academic administrative functions
include operations directly in the field of education. Jobs relating to areas outside the educational field are
not within the definition of academic administration.
(1) Employees engaged in academic administrative functions include: the superintendent or other
head of an elementary or secondary school system, and any assistants, responsible for administration of
such matters as curriculum, quality and methods of instructing, measuring and testing the learning
potential and achievement of students, establishing and maintaining academic and grading standards,
and other aspects of the teaching program; the principal and any vice-principals responsible for the
operation of an elementary or secondary school; department heads in institutions of higher education
responsible for the administration of the mathematics department, the English department, the foreign
language department, etc.; academic counselors who perform work such as administering school testing
programs, assisting students with academic problems and advising students concerning degree
requirements; and other employees with similar responsibilities.
(2) Jobs relating to building management and maintenance, jobs relating to the health of the
students, and academic staff such as social workers, psychologists, lunch room managers or dietitians do
not perform academic administrative functions. Although such work is not considered academic
administration, such employees may qualify for exemption under §541.200 or under other sections of this
part, provided the requirements for such exemptions are met.

Subpart D—Professional Employees
§541.300 General rule for professional employees.
(a) The term “employee employed in a bona fide professional capacity” in section 13(a)(1) of the Act
shall mean any employee:
(1) Compensated on a salary or fee basis at a rate of not less than $455 per week (or $380 per
week, if employed in American Samoa by employers other than the Federal Government), exclusive of
board, lodging, or other facilities; and

(2) Whose primary duty is the performance of work:
(i) Requiring knowledge of an advanced type in a field of science or learning customarily acquired by
a prolonged course of specialized intellectual instruction; or
(ii) Requiring invention, imagination, originality or talent in a recognized field of artistic or creative
endeavor.
(b) The term “salary basis” is defined at §541.602; “fee basis” is defined at §541.605; “board,
lodging or other facilities” is defined at §541.606; and “primary duty” is defined at §541.700.
§541.301 Learned professionals.
(a) To qualify for the learned professional exemption, an employee's primary duty must be the
performance of work requiring advanced knowledge in a field of science or learning customarily acquired
by a prolonged course of specialized intellectual instruction. This primary duty test includes three
elements:
(1) The employee must perform work requiring advanced knowledge;
(2) The advanced knowledge must be in a field of science or learning; and
(3) The advanced knowledge must be customarily acquired by a prolonged course of specialized
intellectual instruction.
(b) The phrase “work requiring advanced knowledge” means work which is predominantly
intellectual in character, and which includes work requiring the consistent exercise of discretion and
judgment, as distinguished from performance of routine mental, manual, mechanical or physical work. An
employee who performs work requiring advanced knowledge generally uses the advanced knowledge to
analyze, interpret or make deductions from varying facts or circumstances. Advanced knowledge cannot
be attained at the high school level.
(c) The phrase “field of science or learning” includes the traditional professions of law, medicine,
theology, accounting, actuarial computation, engineering, architecture, teaching, various types of
physical, chemical and biological sciences, pharmacy and other similar occupations that have a
recognized professional status as distinguished from the mechanical arts or skilled trades where in some
instances the knowledge is of a fairly advanced type, but is not in a field of science or learning.
(d) The phrase “customarily acquired by a prolonged course of specialized intellectual instruction”
restricts the exemption to professions where specialized academic training is a standard prerequisite for
entrance into the profession. The best prima facie evidence that an employee meets this requirement is
possession of the appropriate academic degree. However, the word “customarily” means that the
exemption is also available to employees in such professions who have substantially the same
knowledge level and perform substantially the same work as the degreed employees, but who attained
the advanced knowledge through a combination of work experience and intellectual instruction. Thus, for
example, the learned professional exemption is available to the occasional lawyer who has not gone to
law school, or the occasional chemist who is not the possessor of a degree in chemistry. However, the
learned professional exemption is not available for occupations that customarily may be performed with
only the general knowledge acquired by an academic degree in any field, with knowledge acquired
through an apprenticeship, or with training in the performance of routine mental, manual, mechanical or
physical processes. The learned professional exemption also does not apply to occupations in which
most employees have acquired their skill by experience rather than by advanced specialized intellectual
instruction.

(e)(1) Registered or certified medical technologists. Registered or certified medical technologists
who have successfully completed three academic years of pre-professional study in an accredited college
or university plus a fourth year of professional course work in a school of medical technology approved by
the Council of Medical Education of the American Medical Association generally meet the duties
requirements for the learned professional exemption.
(2) Nurses. Registered nurses who are registered by the appropriate State examining board
generally meet the duties requirements for the learned professional exemption. Licensed practical nurses
and other similar health care employees, however, generally do not qualify as exempt learned
professionals because possession of a specialized advanced academic degree is not a standard
prerequisite for entry into such occupations.
(3) Dental hygienists. Dental hygienists who have successfully completed four academic years of
pre-professional and professional study in an accredited college or university approved by the
Commission on Accreditation of Dental and Dental Auxiliary Educational Programs of the American
Dental Association generally meet the duties requirements for the learned professional exemption.
(4) Physician assistants. Physician assistants who have successfully completed four academic
years of pre-professional and professional study, including graduation from a physician assistant program
accredited by the Accreditation Review Commission on Education for the Physician Assistant, and who
are certified by the National Commission on Certification of Physician Assistants generally meet the
duties requirements for the learned professional exemption.
(5) Accountants. Certified public accountants generally meet the duties requirements for the learned
professional exemption. In addition, many other accountants who are not certified public accountants but
perform similar job duties may qualify as exempt learned professionals. However, accounting clerks,
bookkeepers and other employees who normally perform a great deal of routine work generally will not
qualify as exempt professionals.
(6) Chefs. Chefs, such as executive chefs and sous chefs, who have attained a four-year
specialized academic degree in a culinary arts program, generally meet the duties requirements for the
learned professional exemption. The learned professional exemption is not available to cooks who
perform predominantly routine mental, manual, mechanical or physical work.
(7) Paralegals. Paralegals and legal assistants generally do not qualify as exempt learned
professionals because an advanced specialized academic degree is not a standard prerequisite for entry
into the field. Although many paralegals possess general four-year advanced degrees, most specialized
paralegal programs are two-year associate degree programs from a community college or equivalent
institution. However, the learned professional exemption is available for paralegals who possess
advanced specialized degrees in other professional fields and apply advanced knowledge in that field in
the performance of their duties. For example, if a law firm hires an engineer as a paralegal to provide
expert advice on product liability cases or to assist on patent matters, that engineer would qualify for
exemption.
(8) Athletic trainers. Athletic trainers who have successfully completed four academic years of preprofessional and professional study in a specialized curriculum accredited by the Commission on
Accreditation of Allied Health Education Programs and who are certified by the Board of Certification of
the National Athletic Trainers Association Board of Certification generally meet the duties requirements
for the learned professional exemption.
(9) Funeral directors or embalmers. Licensed funeral directors and embalmers who are licensed by
and working in a state that requires successful completion of four academic years of pre-professional and
professional study, including graduation from a college of mortuary science accredited by the American

Board of Funeral Service Education, generally meet the duties requirements for the learned professional
exemption.
(f) The areas in which the professional exemption may be available are expanding. As knowledge is
developed, academic training is broadened and specialized degrees are offered in new and diverse fields,
thus creating new specialists in particular fields of science or learning. When an advanced specialized
degree has become a standard requirement for a particular occupation, that occupation may have
acquired the characteristics of a learned profession. Accrediting and certifying organizations similar to
those listed in paragraphs (e)(1), (e)(3), (e)(4), (e)(8) and (e)(9) of this section also may be created in the
future. Such organizations may develop similar specialized curriculums and certification programs which,
if a standard requirement for a particular occupation, may indicate that the occupation has acquired the
characteristics of a learned profession.
§541.302 Creative professionals.
(a) To qualify for the creative professional exemption, an employee's primary duty must be the
performance of work requiring invention, imagination, originality or talent in a recognized field of artistic or
creative endeavor as opposed to routine mental, manual, mechanical or physical work. The exemption
does not apply to work which can be produced by a person with general manual or intellectual ability and
training.
(b) To qualify for exemption as a creative professional, the work performed must be “in a recognized
field of artistic or creative endeavor.” This includes such fields as music, writing, acting and the graphic
arts.
(c) The requirement of “invention, imagination, originality or talent” distinguishes the creative
professions from work that primarily depends on intelligence, diligence and accuracy. The duties of
employees vary widely, and exemption as a creative professional depends on the extent of the invention,
imagination, originality or talent exercised by the employee. Determination of exempt creative
professional status, therefore, must be made on a case-by-case basis. This requirement generally is met
by actors, musicians, composers, conductors, and soloists; painters who at most are given the subject
matter of their painting; cartoonists who are merely told the title or underlying concept of a cartoon and
must rely on their own creative ability to express the concept; essayists, novelists, short-story writers and
screen-play writers who choose their own subjects and hand in a finished piece of work to their employers
(the majority of such persons are, of course, not employees but self-employed); and persons holding the
more responsible writing positions in advertising agencies. This requirement generally is not met by a
person who is employed as a copyist, as an “animator” of motion-picture cartoons, or as a retoucher of
photographs, since such work is not properly described as creative in character.
(d) Journalists may satisfy the duties requirements for the creative professional exemption if their
primary duty is work requiring invention, imagination, originality or talent, as opposed to work which
depends primarily on intelligence, diligence and accuracy. Employees of newspapers, magazines,
television and other media are not exempt creative professionals if they only collect, organize and record
information that is routine or already public, or if they do not contribute a unique interpretation or analysis
to a news product. Thus, for example, newspaper reporters who merely rewrite press releases or who
write standard recounts of public information by gathering facts on routine community events are not
exempt creative professionals. Reporters also do not qualify as exempt creative professionals if their work
product is subject to substantial control by the employer. However, journalists may qualify as exempt
creative professionals if their primary duty is performing on the air in radio, television or other electronic
media; conducting investigative interviews; analyzing or interpreting public events; writing editorials,
opinion columns or other commentary; or acting as a narrator or commentator.
§541.303 Teachers.

(a) The term “employee employed in a bona fide professional capacity” in section 13(a)(1) of the Act
also means any employee with a primary duty of teaching, tutoring, instructing or lecturing in the activity
of imparting knowledge and who is employed and engaged in this activity as a teacher in an educational
establishment by which the employee is employed. The term “educational establishment” is defined in
§541.204(b).
(b) Exempt teachers include, but are not limited to: Regular academic teachers; teachers of
kindergarten or nursery school pupils; teachers of gifted or disabled children; teachers of skilled and
semi-skilled trades and occupations; teachers engaged in automobile driving instruction; aircraft flight
instructors; home economics teachers; and vocal or instrumental music instructors. Those faculty
members who are engaged as teachers but also spend a considerable amount of their time in
extracurricular activities such as coaching athletic teams or acting as moderators or advisors in such
areas as drama, speech, debate or journalism are engaged in teaching. Such activities are a recognized
part of the schools' responsibility in contributing to the educational development of the student.
(c) The possession of an elementary or secondary teacher's certificate provides a clear means of
identifying the individuals contemplated as being within the scope of the exemption for teaching
professionals. Teachers who possess a teaching certificate qualify for the exemption regardless of the
terminology (e.g., permanent, conditional, standard, provisional, temporary, emergency, or unlimited)
used by the State to refer to different kinds of certificates. However, private schools and public schools
are not uniform in requiring a certificate for employment as an elementary or secondary school teacher,
and a teacher's certificate is not generally necessary for employment in institutions of higher education or
other educational establishments. Therefore, a teacher who is not certified may be considered for
exemption, provided that such individual is employed as a teacher by the employing school or school
system.
(d) The requirements of §541.300 and Subpart G (salary requirements) of this part do not apply to
the teaching professionals described in this section.
§541.304 Practice of law or medicine.
(a) The term “employee employed in a bona fide professional capacity” in section 13(a)(1) of the Act
also shall mean:
(1) Any employee who is the holder of a valid license or certificate permitting the practice of law or
medicine or any of their branches and is actually engaged in the practice thereof; and
(2) Any employee who is the holder of the requisite academic degree for the general practice of
medicine and is engaged in an internship or resident program pursuant to the practice of the profession.
(b) In the case of medicine, the exemption applies to physicians and other practitioners licensed and
practicing in the field of medical science and healing or any of the medical specialties practiced by
physicians or practitioners. The term “physicians” includes medical doctors including general practitioners
and specialists, osteopathic physicians (doctors of osteopathy), podiatrists, dentists (doctors of dental
medicine), and optometrists (doctors of optometry or bachelors of science in optometry).
(c) Employees engaged in internship or resident programs, whether or not licensed to practice prior
to commencement of the program, qualify as exempt professionals if they enter such internship or
resident programs after the earning of the appropriate degree required for the general practice of their
profession.
(d) The requirements of §541.300 and subpart G (salary requirements) of this part do not apply to
the employees described in this section.

Subpart E—Computer Employees
§541.400 General rule for computer employees.
(a) Computer systems analysts, computer programmers, software engineers or other similarly
skilled workers in the computer field are eligible for exemption as professionals under section 13(a)(1) of
the Act and under section 13(a)(17) of the Act. Because job titles vary widely and change quickly in the
computer industry, job titles are not determinative of the applicability of this exemption.
(b) The section 13(a)(1) exemption applies to any computer employee compensated on a salary or
fee basis at a rate of not less than $455 per week (or $380 per week, if employed in American Samoa by
employers other than the Federal Government), exclusive of board, lodging or other facilities, and the
section 13(a)(17) exemption applies to any computer employee compensated on an hourly basis at a rate
not less than $27.63 an hour. In addition, under either section 13(a)(1) or section 13(a)(17) of the Act, the
exemptions apply only to computer employees whose primary duty consists of:
(1) The application of systems analysis techniques and procedures, including consulting with users,
to determine hardware, software or system functional specifications;
(2) The design, development, documentation, analysis, creation, testing or modification of computer
systems or programs, including prototypes, based on and related to user or system design specifications;
(3) The design, documentation, testing, creation or modification of computer programs related to
machine operating systems; or
(4) A combination of the aforementioned duties, the performance of which requires the same level of
skills.
(c) The term “salary basis” is defined at §541.602; “fee basis” is defined at §541.605; “board, lodging
or other facilities” is defined at §541.606; and “primary duty” is defined at §541.700.
§541.401 Computer manufacture and repair.
The exemption for employees in computer occupations does not include employees engaged in the
manufacture or repair of computer hardware and related equipment. Employees whose work is highly
dependent upon, or facilitated by, the use of computers and computer software programs (e.g.,
engineers, drafters and others skilled in computer-aided design software), but who are not primarily
engaged in computer systems analysis and programming or other similarly skilled computer-related
occupations identified in §541.400(b), are also not exempt computer professionals.
§541.402 Executive and administrative computer employees.
Computer employees within the scope of this exemption, as well as those employees not within its
scope, may also have executive and administrative duties which qualify the employees for exemption
under subpart B or subpart C of this part. For example, systems analysts and computer programmers
generally meet the duties requirements for the administrative exemption if their primary duty includes
work such as planning, scheduling, and coordinating activities required to develop systems to solve
complex business, scientific or engineering problems of the employer or the employer's customers.
Similarly, a senior or lead computer programmer who manages the work of two or more other
programmers in a customarily recognized department or subdivision of the employer, and whose
recommendations as to the hiring, firing, advancement, promotion or other change of status of the other
programmers are given particular weight, generally meets the duties requirements for the executive
exemption.

Subpart F—Outside Sales Employees
§541.500 General rule for outside sales employees.
(a) The term “employee employed in the capacity of outside salesman” in section 13(a)(1) of the Act
shall mean any employee:
(1) Whose primary duty is:
(i) making sales within the meaning of section 3(k) of the Act, or
(ii) obtaining orders or contracts for services or for the use of facilities for which a consideration will
be paid by the client or customer; and
(2) Who is customarily and regularly engaged away from the employer's place or places of business
in performing such primary duty.
(b) The term “primary duty” is defined at §541.700. In determining the primary duty of an outside
sales employee, work performed incidental to and in conjunction with the employee's own outside sales
or solicitations, including incidental deliveries and collections, shall be regarded as exempt outside sales
work. Other work that furthers the employee's sales efforts also shall be regarded as exempt work
including, for example, writing sales reports, updating or revising the employee's sales or display
catalogue, planning itineraries and attending sales conferences.
(c) The requirements of subpart G (salary requirements) of this part do not apply to the outside sales
employees described in this section.
§541.501 Making sales or obtaining orders.
(a) Section 541.500 requires that the employee be engaged in:
(1) Making sales within the meaning of section 3(k) of the Act, or
(2) Obtaining orders or contracts for services or for the use of facilities.
(b) Sales within the meaning of section 3(k) of the Act include the transfer of title to tangible
property, and in certain cases, of tangible and valuable evidences of intangible property. Section 3(k) of
the Act states that “sale” or “sell” includes any sale, exchange, contract to sell, consignment for sale,
shipment for sale, or other disposition.
(c) Exempt outside sales work includes not only the sales of commodities, but also “obtaining orders
or contracts for services or for the use of facilities for which a consideration will be paid by the client or
customer.” Obtaining orders for “the use of facilities” includes the selling of time on radio or television, the
solicitation of advertising for newspapers and other periodicals, and the solicitation of freight for railroads
and other transportation agencies.
(d) The word “services” extends the outside sales exemption to employees who sell or take orders
for a service, which may be performed for the customer by someone other than the person taking the
order.
§541.502 Away from employer's place of business.

An outside sales employee must be customarily and regularly engaged “away from the employer's
place or places of business.” The outside sales employee is an employee who makes sales at the
customer's place of business or, if selling door-to-door, at the customer's home. Outside sales does not
include sales made by mail, telephone or the Internet unless such contact is used merely as an adjunct to
personal calls. Thus, any fixed site, whether home or office, used by a salesperson as a headquarters or
for telephonic solicitation of sales is considered one of the employer's places of business, even though
the employer is not in any formal sense the owner or tenant of the property. However, an outside sales
employee does not lose the exemption by displaying samples in hotel sample rooms during trips from city
to city; these sample rooms should not be considered as the employer's places of business. Similarly, an
outside sales employee does not lose the exemption by displaying the employer's products at a trade
show. If selling actually occurs, rather than just sales promotion, trade shows of short duration (i.e., one
or two weeks) should not be considered as the employer's place of business.
§541.503 Promotion work.
(a) Promotion work is one type of activity often performed by persons who make sales, which may
or may not be exempt outside sales work, depending upon the circumstances under which it is
performed. Promotional work that is actually performed incidental to and in conjunction with an
employee's own outside sales or solicitations is exempt work. On the other hand, promotional work that is
incidental to sales made, or to be made, by someone else is not exempt outside sales work. An employee
who does not satisfy the requirements of this subpart may still qualify as an exempt employee under other
subparts of this rule.
(b) A manufacturer's representative, for example, may perform various types of promotional
activities such as putting up displays and posters, removing damaged or spoiled stock from the
merchant's shelves or rearranging the merchandise. Such an employee can be considered an exempt
outside sales employee if the employee's primary duty is making sales or contracts. Promotion activities
directed toward consummation of the employee's own sales are exempt. Promotional activities designed
to stimulate sales that will be made by someone else are not exempt outside sales work.
(c) Another example is a company representative who visits chain stores, arranges the merchandise
on shelves, replenishes stock by replacing old with new merchandise, sets up displays and consults with
the store manager when inventory runs low, but does not obtain a commitment for additional purchases.
The arrangement of merchandise on the shelves or the replenishing of stock is not exempt work unless it
is incidental to and in conjunction with the employee's own outside sales. Because the employee in this
instance does not consummate the sale nor direct efforts toward the consummation of a sale, the work is
not exempt outside sales work.
§541.504 Drivers who sell.
(a) Drivers who deliver products and also sell such products may qualify as exempt outside sales
employees only if the employee has a primary duty of making sales. In determining the primary duty of
drivers who sell, work performed incidental to and in conjunction with the employee's own outside sales or
solicitations, including loading, driving or delivering products, shall be regarded as exempt outside sales
work.
(b) Several factors should be considered in determining if a driver has a primary duty of making
sales, including, but not limited to: a comparison of the driver's duties with those of other employees
engaged as truck drivers and as salespersons; possession of a selling or solicitor's license when such
license is required by law or ordinances; presence or absence of customary or contractual arrangements
concerning amounts of products to be delivered; description of the employee's occupation in collective
bargaining agreements; the employer's specifications as to qualifications for hiring; sales training;
attendance at sales conferences; method of payment; and proportion of earnings directly attributable to
sales.

(c) Drivers who may qualify as exempt outside sales employees include:
(1) A driver who provides the only sales contact between the employer and the customers visited,
who calls on customers and takes orders for products, who delivers products from stock in the
employee's vehicle or procures and delivers the product to the customer on a later trip, and who receives
compensation commensurate with the volume of products sold.
(2) A driver who obtains or solicits orders for the employer's products from persons who have
authority to commit the customer for purchases.
(3) A driver who calls on new prospects for customers along the employee's route and attempts to
convince them of the desirability of accepting regular delivery of goods.
(4) A driver who calls on established customers along the route and persuades regular customers to
accept delivery of increased amounts of goods or of new products, even though the initial sale or
agreement for delivery was made by someone else.
(d) Drivers who generally would not qualify as exempt outside sales employees include:
(1) A route driver whose primary duty is to transport products sold by the employer through vending
machines and to keep such machines stocked, in good operating condition, and in good locations.
(2) A driver who often calls on established customers day after day or week after week, delivering a
quantity of the employer's products at each call when the sale was not significantly affected by
solicitations of the customer by the delivering driver or the amount of the sale is determined by the
volume of the customer's sales since the previous delivery.
(3) A driver primarily engaged in making deliveries to customers and performing activities intended
to promote sales by customers (including placing point-of-sale and other advertising materials, price
stamping commodities, arranging merchandise on shelves, in coolers or in cabinets, rotating stock
according to date, and cleaning and otherwise servicing display cases), unless such work is in
furtherance of the driver's own sales efforts.

Subpart G—Salary Requirements
§541.600 Amount of salary required.
(a) To qualify as an exempt executive, administrative or professional employee under section
13(a)(1) of the Act, an employee must be compensated on a salary basis at a rate of not less than $455
per week (or $380 per week, if employed in American Samoa by employers other than the Federal
Government), exclusive of board, lodging or other facilities. Administrative and professional employees
may also be paid on a fee basis, as defined in §541.605.
(b) The $455 a week may be translated into equivalent amounts for periods longer than one week.
The requirement will be met if the employee is compensated biweekly on a salary basis of $910,
semimonthly on a salary basis of $985.83, or monthly on a salary basis of $1,971.66. However, the
shortest period of payment that will meet this compensation requirement is one week.
(c) In the case of academic administrative employees, the compensation requirement also may be
met by compensation on a salary basis at a rate at least equal to the entrance salary for teachers in the
educational establishment by which the employee is employed, as provided in §541.204(a)(1).

(d) In the case of computer employees, the compensation requirement also may be met by
compensation on an hourly basis at a rate not less than $27.63 an hour, as provided in §541.400(b).
(e) In the case of professional employees, the compensation requirements in this section shall not
apply to employees engaged as teachers (see §541.303); employees who hold a valid license or
certificate permitting the practice of law or medicine or any of their branches and are actually engaged in
the practice thereof (see §541.304); or to employees who hold the requisite academic degree for the
general practice of medicine and are engaged in an internship or resident program pursuant to the
practice of the profession (see §541.304). In the case of medical occupations, the exception from the
salary or fee requirement does not apply to pharmacists, nurses, therapists, technologists, sanitarians,
dietitians, social workers, psychologists, psychometrists, or other professions which service the medical
profession.
§541.601 Highly compensated employees.
(a) An employee with total annual compensation of at least $100,000 is deemed exempt under
section 13(a)(1) of the Act if the employee customarily and regularly performs any one or more of the
exempt duties or responsibilities of an executive, administrative or professional employee identified in
subparts B, C or D of this part.
(b)(1) “Total annual compensation” must include at least $455 per week paid on a salary or fee
basis. Total annual compensation may also include commissions, nondiscretionary bonuses and other
nondiscretionary compensation earned during a 52-week period. Total annual compensation does not
include board, lodging and other facilities as defined in §541.606, and does not include payments for
medical insurance, payments for life insurance, contributions to retirement plans and the cost of other
fringe benefits.
(2) If an employee's total annual compensation does not total at least the minimum amount
established in paragraph (a) of this section by the last pay period of the 52-week period, the employer
may, during the last pay period or within one month after the end of the 52-week period, make one final
payment sufficient to achieve the required level. For example, an employee may earn $80,000 in base
salary, and the employer may anticipate based upon past sales that the employee also will earn $20,000
in commissions. However, due to poor sales in the final quarter of the year, the employee actually only
earns $10,000 in commissions. In this situation, the employer may within one month after the end of the
year make a payment of at least $10,000 to the employee. Any such final payment made after the end of
the 52-week period may count only toward the prior year's total annual compensation and not toward the
total annual compensation in the year it was paid. If the employer fails to make such a payment, the
employee does not qualify as a highly compensated employee, but may still qualify as exempt under
subparts B, C or D of this part.
(3) An employee who does not work a full year for the employer, either because the employee is
newly hired after the beginning of the year or ends the employment before the end of the year, may
qualify for exemption under this section if the employee receives a pro rata portion of the minimum
amount established in paragraph (a) of this section, based upon the number of weeks that the employee
will be or has been employed. An employer may make one final payment as under paragraph (b)(2) of
this section within one month after the end of employment.
(4) The employer may utilize any 52-week period as the year, such as a calendar year, a fiscal year,
or an anniversary of hire year. If the employer does not identify some other year period in advance, the
calendar year will apply.
(c) A high level of compensation is a strong indicator of an employee's exempt status, thus
eliminating the need for a detailed analysis of the employee's job duties. Thus, a highly compensated
employee will qualify for exemption if the employee customarily and regularly performs any one or more

of the exempt duties or responsibilities of an executive, administrative or professional employee identified
in subparts B, C or D of this part. An employee may qualify as a highly compensated executive employee,
for example, if the employee customarily and regularly directs the work of two or more other employees,
even though the employee does not meet all of the other requirements for the executive exemption under
§541.100.
(d) This section applies only to employees whose primary duty includes performing office or nonmanual work. Thus, for example, non-management production-line workers and non-management
employees in maintenance, construction and similar occupations such as carpenters, electricians,
mechanics, plumbers, iron workers, craftsmen, operating engineers, longshoremen, construction workers,
laborers and other employees who perform work involving repetitive operations with their hands, physical
skill and energy are not exempt under this section no matter how highly paid they might be.
§541.602 Salary basis.
(a) General rule. An employee will be considered to be paid on a “salary basis” within the meaning
of these regulations if the employee regularly receives each pay period on a weekly, or less frequent
basis, a predetermined amount constituting all or part of the employee's compensation, which amount is
not subject to reduction because of variations in the quality or quantity of the work performed. Subject to
the exceptions provided in paragraph (b) of this section, an exempt employee must receive the full salary
for any week in which the employee performs any work without regard to the number of days or hours
worked. Exempt employees need not be paid for any workweek in which they perform no work. An
employee is not paid on a salary basis if deductions from the employee's predetermined compensation
are made for absences occasioned by the employer or by the operating requirements of the business. If
the employee is ready, willing and able to work, deductions may not be made for time when work is not
available.
(b) Exceptions. The prohibition against deductions from pay in the salary basis requirement is
subject to the following exceptions:
(1) Deductions from pay may be made when an exempt employee is absent from work for one or
more full days for personal reasons, other than sickness or disability. Thus, if an employee is absent for
two full days to handle personal affairs, the employee's salaried status will not be affected if deductions
are made from the salary for two full-day absences. However, if an exempt employee is absent for one
and a half days for personal reasons, the employer can deduct only for the one full-day absence.
(2) Deductions from pay may be made for absences of one or more full days occasioned by
sickness or disability (including work-related accidents) if the deduction is made in accordance with a
bona fide plan, policy or practice of providing compensation for loss of salary occasioned by such
sickness or disability. The employer is not required to pay any portion of the employee's salary for full-day
absences for which the employee receives compensation under the plan, policy or practice. Deductions
for such full-day absences also may be made before the employee has qualified under the plan, policy or
practice, and after the employee has exhausted the leave allowance thereunder. Thus, for example, if an
employer maintains a short-term disability insurance plan providing salary replacement for 12 weeks
starting on the fourth day of absence, the employer may make deductions from pay for the three days of
absence before the employee qualifies for benefits under the plan; for the twelve weeks in which the
employee receives salary replacement benefits under the plan; and for absences after the employee has
exhausted the 12 weeks of salary replacement benefits. Similarly, an employer may make deductions
from pay for absences of one or more full days if salary replacement benefits are provided under a State
disability insurance law or under a State workers' compensation law.
(3) While an employer cannot make deductions from pay for absences of an exempt employee
occasioned by jury duty, attendance as a witness or temporary military leave, the employer can offset any

amounts received by an employee as jury fees, witness fees or military pay for a particular week against
the salary due for that particular week without loss of the exemption.
(4) Deductions from pay of exempt employees may be made for penalties imposed in good faith for
infractions of safety rules of major significance. Safety rules of major significance include those relating to
the prevention of serious danger in the workplace or to other employees, such as rules prohibiting
smoking in explosive plants, oil refineries and coal mines.
(5) Deductions from pay of exempt employees may be made for unpaid disciplinary suspensions of
one or more full days imposed in good faith for infractions of workplace conduct rules. Such suspensions
must be imposed pursuant to a written policy applicable to all employees. Thus, for example, an employer
may suspend an exempt employee without pay for three days for violating a generally applicable written
policy prohibiting sexual harassment. Similarly, an employer may suspend an exempt employee without
pay for twelve days for violating a generally applicable written policy prohibiting workplace violence.
(6) An employer is not required to pay the full salary in the initial or terminal week of employment.
Rather, an employer may pay a proportionate part of an employee's full salary for the time actually
worked in the first and last week of employment. In such weeks, the payment of an hourly or daily
equivalent of the employee's full salary for the time actually worked will meet the requirement. However,
employees are not paid on a salary basis within the meaning of these regulations if they are employed
occasionally for a few days, and the employer pays them a proportionate part of the weekly salary when
so employed.
(7) An employer is not required to pay the full salary for weeks in which an exempt employee takes
unpaid leave under the Family and Medical Leave Act. Rather, when an exempt employee takes unpaid
leave under the Family and Medical Leave Act, an employer may pay a proportionate part of the full
salary for time actually worked. For example, if an employee who normally works 40 hours per week uses
four hours of unpaid leave under the Family and Medical Leave Act, the employer could deduct 10
percent of the employee's normal salary that week.
(c) When calculating the amount of a deduction from pay allowed under paragraph (b) of this
section, the employer may use the hourly or daily equivalent of the employee's full weekly salary or any
other amount proportional to the time actually missed by the employee. A deduction from pay as a
penalty for violations of major safety rules under paragraph (b)(4) of this section may be made in any
amount.
§541.603 Effect of improper deductions from salary.
(a) An employer who makes improper deductions from salary shall lose the exemption if the facts
demonstrate that the employer did not intend to pay employees on a salary basis. An actual practice of
making improper deductions demonstrates that the employer did not intend to pay employees on a salary
basis. The factors to consider when determining whether an employer has an actual practice of making
improper deductions include, but are not limited to: the number of improper deductions, particularly as
compared to the number of employee infractions warranting discipline; the time period during which the
employer made improper deductions; the number and geographic location of employees whose salary
was improperly reduced; the number and geographic location of managers responsible for taking the
improper deductions; and whether the employer has a clearly communicated policy permitting or
prohibiting improper deductions.
(b) If the facts demonstrate that the employer has an actual practice of making improper deductions,
the exemption is lost during the time period in which the improper deductions were made for employees
in the same job classification working for the same managers responsible for the actual improper
deductions. Employees in different job classifications or who work for different managers do not lose their
status as exempt employees. Thus, for example, if a manager at a company facility routinely docks the

pay of engineers at that facility for partial-day personal absences, then all engineers at that facility whose
pay could have been improperly docked by the manager would lose the exemption; engineers at other
facilities or working for other managers, however, would remain exempt.
(c) Improper deductions that are either isolated or inadvertent will not result in loss of the exemption
for any employees subject to such improper deductions, if the employer reimburses the employees for
such improper deductions.
(d) If an employer has a clearly communicated policy that prohibits the improper pay deductions
specified in §541.602(a) and includes a complaint mechanism, reimburses employees for any improper
deductions and makes a good faith commitment to comply in the future, such employer will not lose the
exemption for any employees unless the employer willfully violates the policy by continuing to make
improper deductions after receiving employee complaints. If an employer fails to reimburse employees for
any improper deductions or continues to make improper deductions after receiving employee complaints,
the exemption is lost during the time period in which the improper deductions were made for employees
in the same job classification working for the same managers responsible for the actual improper
deductions. The best evidence of a clearly communicated policy is a written policy that was distributed to
employees prior to the improper pay deductions by, for example, providing a copy of the policy to
employees at the time of hire, publishing the policy in an employee handbook or publishing the policy on
the employer's Intranet.
(e) This section shall not be construed in an unduly technical manner so as to defeat the exemption.
§541.604 Minimum guarantee plus extras.
(a) An employer may provide an exempt employee with additional compensation without losing the
exemption or violating the salary basis requirement, if the employment arrangement also includes a
guarantee of at least the minimum weekly-required amount paid on a salary basis. Thus, for example, an
exempt employee guaranteed at least $455 each week paid on a salary basis may also receive additional
compensation of a one percent commission on sales. An exempt employee also may receive a
percentage of the sales or profits of the employer if the employment arrangement also includes a
guarantee of at least $455 each week paid on a salary basis. Similarly, the exemption is not lost if an
exempt employee who is guaranteed at least $455 each week paid on a salary basis also receives
additional compensation based on hours worked for work beyond the normal workweek. Such additional
compensation may be paid on any basis (e.g., flat sum, bonus payment, straight-time hourly amount, time
and one-half or any other basis), and may include paid time off.
(b) An exempt employee's earnings may be computed on an hourly, a daily or a shift basis, without
losing the exemption or violating the salary basis requirement, if the employment arrangement also
includes a guarantee of at least the minimum weekly required amount paid on a salary basis regardless
of the number of hours, days or shifts worked, and a reasonable relationship exists between the
guaranteed amount and the amount actually earned. The reasonable relationship test will be met if the
weekly guarantee is roughly equivalent to the employee's usual earnings at the assigned hourly, daily or
shift rate for the employee's normal scheduled workweek. Thus, for example, an exempt employee
guaranteed compensation of at least $500 for any week in which the employee performs any work, and
who normally works four or five shifts each week, may be paid $150 per shift without violating the salary
basis requirement. The reasonable relationship requirement applies only if the employee's pay is
computed on an hourly, daily or shift basis. It does not apply, for example, to an exempt store manager
paid a guaranteed salary of $650 per week who also receives a commission of one-half percent of all
sales in the store or five percent of the store's profits, which in some weeks may total as much as, or even
more than, the guaranteed salary.
§541.605 Fee basis.

(a) Administrative and professional employees may be paid on a fee basis, rather than on a salary
basis. An employee will be considered to be paid on a “fee basis” within the meaning of these regulations
if the employee is paid an agreed sum for a single job regardless of the time required for its completion.
These payments resemble piecework payments with the important distinction that generally a “fee” is paid
for the kind of job that is unique rather than for a series of jobs repeated an indefinite number of times and
for which payment on an identical basis is made over and over again. Payments based on the number of
hours or days worked and not on the accomplishment of a given single task are not considered payments
on a fee basis.
(b) To determine whether the fee payment meets the minimum amount of salary required for
exemption under these regulations, the amount paid to the employee will be tested by determining the
time worked on the job and whether the fee payment is at a rate that would amount to at least $455 per
week if the employee worked 40 hours. Thus, an artist paid $250 for a picture that took 20 hours to
complete meets the minimum salary requirement for exemption since earnings at this rate would yield the
artist $500 if 40 hours were worked.
§541.606 Board, lodging or other facilities.
(a) To qualify for exemption under section 13(a)(1) of the Act, an employee must earn the minimum
salary amount set forth in §541.600, “exclusive of board, lodging or other facilities.” The phrase “exclusive
of board, lodging or other facilities” means “free and clear” or independent of any claimed credit for noncash items of value that an employer may provide to an employee. Thus, the costs incurred by an
employer to provide an employee with board, lodging or other facilities may not count towards the
minimum salary amount required for exemption under this part 541. Such separate transactions are not
prohibited between employers and their exempt employees, but the costs to employers associated with
such transactions may not be considered when determining if an employee has received the full required
minimum salary payment.
(b) Regulations defining what constitutes “board, lodging, or other facilities” are contained in 29 CFR
part 531. As described in 29 CFR 531.32, the term “other facilities” refers to items similar to board and
lodging, such as meals furnished at company restaurants or cafeterias or by hospitals, hotels, or
restaurants to their employees; meals, dormitory rooms, and tuition furnished by a college to its student
employees; merchandise furnished at company stores or commissaries, including articles of food,
clothing, and household effects; housing furnished for dwelling purposes; and transportation furnished to
employees for ordinary commuting between their homes and work.

Subpart H—Definitions and Miscellaneous Provisions
§541.700 Primary duty.
(a) To qualify for exemption under this part, an employee's “primary duty” must be the performance
of exempt work. The term “primary duty” means the principal, main, major or most important duty that the
employee performs. Determination of an employee's primary duty must be based on all the facts in a
particular case, with the major emphasis on the character of the employee's job as a whole. Factors to
consider when determining the primary duty of an employee include, but are not limited to, the relative
importance of the exempt duties as compared with other types of duties; the amount of time spent
performing exempt work; the employee's relative freedom from direct supervision; and the relationship
between the employee's salary and the wages paid to other employees for the kind of nonexempt work
performed by the employee.
(b) The amount of time spent performing exempt work can be a useful guide in determining whether
exempt work is the primary duty of an employee. Thus, employees who spend more than 50 percent of
their time performing exempt work will generally satisfy the primary duty requirement. Time alone,
however, is not the sole test, and nothing in this section requires that exempt employees spend more

than 50 percent of their time performing exempt work. Employees who do not spend more than 50
percent of their time performing exempt duties may nonetheless meet the primary duty requirement if the
other factors support such a conclusion.
(c) Thus, for example, assistant managers in a retail establishment who perform exempt executive
work such as supervising and directing the work of other employees, ordering merchandise, managing
the budget and authorizing payment of bills may have management as their primary duty even if the
assistant managers spend more than 50 percent of the time performing nonexempt work such as running
the cash register. However, if such assistant managers are closely supervised and earn little more than
the nonexempt employees, the assistant managers generally would not satisfy the primary duty
requirement.
§541.701 Customarily and regularly.
The phrase “customarily and regularly” means a frequency that must be greater than occasional but
which, of course, may be less than constant. Tasks or work performed “customarily and regularly”
includes work normally and recurrently performed every workweek; it does not include isolated or onetime tasks.
§541.702 Exempt and nonexempt work.
The term “exempt work” means all work described in §§541.100, 541.101, 541.200, 541.300,
541.301, 541.302, 541.303, 541.304, 541.400 and 541.500, and the activities directly and closely related
to such work. All other work is considered “nonexempt.”
§541.703 Directly and closely related.
(a) Work that is “directly and closely related” to the performance of exempt work is also considered
exempt work. The phrase “directly and closely related” means tasks that are related to exempt duties and
that contribute to or facilitate performance of exempt work. Thus, “directly and closely related” work may
include physical tasks and menial tasks that arise out of exempt duties, and the routine work without
which the exempt employee's exempt work cannot be performed properly. Work “directly and closely
related” to the performance of exempt duties may also include recordkeeping; monitoring and adjusting
machinery; taking notes; using the computer to create documents or presentations; opening the mail for
the purpose of reading it and making decisions; and using a photocopier or fax machine. Work is not
“directly and closely related” if the work is remotely related or completely unrelated to exempt duties.
(b) The following examples further illustrate the type of work that is and is not normally considered
as directly and closely related to exempt work:
(1) Keeping time, production or sales records for subordinates is work directly and closely related to
an exempt executive's function of managing a department and supervising employees.
(2) The distribution of materials, merchandise or supplies to maintain control of the flow of and
expenditures for such items is directly and closely related to the performance of exempt duties.
(3) A supervisor who spot checks and examines the work of subordinates to determine whether they
are performing their duties properly, and whether the product is satisfactory, is performing work which is
directly and closely related to managerial and supervisory functions, so long as the checking is
distinguishable from the work ordinarily performed by a nonexempt inspector.
(4) A supervisor who sets up a machine may be engaged in exempt work, depending upon the
nature of the industry and the operation. In some cases the setup work, or adjustment of the machine for

a particular job, is typically performed by the same employees who operate the machine. Such setup
work is part of the production operation and is not exempt. In other cases, the setting up of the work is a
highly skilled operation which the ordinary production worker or machine tender typically does not
perform. In large plants, non-supervisors may perform such work. However, particularly in small plants,
such work may be a regular duty of the executive and is directly and closely related to the executive's
responsibility for the work performance of subordinates and for the adequacy of the final product. Under
such circumstances, it is exempt work.
(5) A department manager in a retail or service establishment who walks about the sales floor
observing the work of sales personnel under the employee's supervision to determine the effectiveness of
their sales techniques, checks on the quality of customer service being given, or observes customer
preferences is performing work which is directly and closely related to managerial and supervisory
functions.
(6) A business consultant may take extensive notes recording the flow of work and materials
through the office or plant of the client; after returning to the office of the employer, the consultant may
personally use the computer to type a report and create a proposed table of organization. Standing alone,
or separated from the primary duty, such note-taking and typing would be routine in nature. However,
because this work is necessary for analyzing the data and making recommendations, the work is directly
and closely related to exempt work. While it is possible to assign note-taking and typing to nonexempt
employees, and in fact it is frequently the practice to do so, delegating such routine tasks is not required
as a condition of exemption.
(7) A credit manager who makes and administers the credit policy of the employer, establishes
credit limits for customers, authorizes the shipment of orders on credit, and makes decisions on whether
to exceed credit limits would be performing work exempt under §541.200. Work that is directly and closely
related to these exempt duties may include checking the status of accounts to determine whether the
credit limit would be exceeded by the shipment of a new order, removing credit reports from the files for
analysis, and writing letters giving credit data and experience to other employers or credit agencies.
(8) A traffic manager in charge of planning a company's transportation, including the most
economical and quickest routes for shipping merchandise to and from the plant, contracting for commoncarrier and other transportation facilities, negotiating with carriers for adjustments for damages to
merchandise, and making the necessary rearrangements resulting from delays, damages or irregularities
in transit, is performing exempt work. If the employee also spends part of the day taking telephone orders
for local deliveries, such order-taking is a routine function and is not directly and closely related to the
exempt work.
(9) An example of work directly and closely related to exempt professional duties is a chemist
performing menial tasks such as cleaning a test tube in the middle of an original experiment, even though
such menial tasks can be assigned to laboratory assistants.
(10) A teacher performs work directly and closely related to exempt duties when, while taking
students on a field trip, the teacher drives a school van or monitors the students' behavior in a restaurant.
§541.704 Use of manuals.
The use of manuals, guidelines or other established procedures containing or relating to highly
technical, scientific, legal, financial or other similarly complex matters that can be understood or
interpreted only by those with advanced or specialized knowledge or skills does not preclude exemption
under section 13(a)(1) of the Act or the regulations in this part. Such manuals and procedures provide
guidance in addressing difficult or novel circumstances and thus use of such reference material would not
affect an employee's exempt status. The section 13(a)(1) exemptions are not available, however, for
employees who simply apply well-established techniques or procedures described in manuals or other

sources within closely prescribed limits to determine the correct response to an inquiry or set of
circumstances.
§541.705 Trainees.
The executive, administrative, professional, outside sales and computer employee exemptions do
not apply to employees training for employment in an executive, administrative, professional, outside
sales or computer employee capacity who are not actually performing the duties of an executive,
administrative, professional, outside sales or computer employee.
§541.706 Emergencies.
(a) An exempt employee will not lose the exemption by performing work of a normally nonexempt
nature because of the existence of an emergency. Thus, when emergencies arise that threaten the safety
of employees, a cessation of operations or serious damage to the employer's property, any work
performed in an effort to prevent such results is considered exempt work.
(b) An “emergency” does not include occurrences that are not beyond control or for which the
employer can reasonably provide in the normal course of business. Emergencies generally occur only
rarely, and are events that the employer cannot reasonably anticipate.
(c) The following examples illustrate the distinction between emergency work considered exempt
work and routine work that is not exempt work:
(1) A mine superintendent who pitches in after an explosion and digs out workers who are trapped in
the mine is still a bona fide executive.
(2) Assisting nonexempt employees with their work during periods of heavy workload or to handle
rush orders is not exempt work.
(3) Replacing a nonexempt employee during the first day or partial day of an illness may be
considered exempt emergency work depending on factors such as the size of the establishment and of
the executive's department, the nature of the industry, the consequences that would flow from the failure
to replace the ailing employee immediately, and the feasibility of filling the employee's place promptly.
(4) Regular repair and cleaning of equipment is not emergency work, even when necessary to
prevent fire or explosion; however, repairing equipment may be emergency work if the breakdown of or
damage to the equipment was caused by accident or carelessness that the employer could not
reasonably anticipate.
§541.707 Occasional tasks.
Occasional, infrequently recurring tasks that cannot practicably be performed by nonexempt
employees, but are the means for an exempt employee to properly carry out exempt functions and
responsibilities, are considered exempt work. The following factors should be considered in determining
whether such work is exempt work: Whether the same work is performed by any of the exempt
employee's subordinates; practicability of delegating the work to a nonexempt employee; whether the
exempt employee performs the task frequently or occasionally; and existence of an industry practice for
the exempt employee to perform the task.
§541.708 Combination exemptions.

Employees who perform a combination of exempt duties as set forth in the regulations in this part for
executive, administrative, professional, outside sales and computer employees may qualify for exemption.
Thus, for example, an employee whose primary duty involves a combination of exempt administrative and
exempt executive work may qualify for exemption. In other words, work that is exempt under one section
of this part will not defeat the exemption under any other section.
§541.709 Motion picture producing industry.
The requirement that the employee be paid “on a salary basis” does not apply to an employee in the
motion picture producing industry who is compensated at a base rate of at least $695 a week (exclusive
of board, lodging, or other facilities). Thus, an employee in this industry who is otherwise exempt under
subparts B, C or D of this part, and who is employed at a base rate of at least $695 a week is exempt if
paid a proportionate amount (based on a week of not more than 6 days) for any week in which the
employee does not work a full workweek for any reason. Moreover, an otherwise exempt employee in this
industry qualifies for exemption if the employee is employed at a daily rate under the following
circumstances:
(a) The employee is in a job category for which a weekly base rate is not provided and the daily
base rate would yield at least $695 if 6 days were worked; or
(b) The employee is in a job category having a weekly base rate of at least $695 and the daily base
rate is at least one-sixth of such weekly base rate.
§541.710 Employees of public agencies.
(a) An employee of a public agency who otherwise meets the salary basis requirements of §541.602
shall not be disqualified from exemption under §§541.100, 541.200, 541.300 or 541.400 on the basis that
such employee is paid according to a pay system established by statute, ordinance or regulation, or by a
policy or practice established pursuant to principles of public accountability, under which the employee
accrues personal leave and sick leave and which requires the public agency employee's pay to be
reduced or such employee to be placed on leave without pay for absences for personal reasons or
because of illness or injury of less than one work-day when accrued leave is not used by an employee
because:
(1) Permission for its use has not been sought or has been sought and denied;
(2) Accrued leave has been exhausted; or
(3) The employee chooses to use leave without pay.
(b) Deductions from the pay of an employee of a public agency for absences due to a budgetrequired furlough shall not disqualify the employee from being paid on a salary basis except in the
workweek in which the furlough occurs and for which the employee's pay is accordingly reduced.

